Up until now, we've discussed that data closely related to revenue and
customer satisfaction will be a KPI for any profit driven product or company.
As a product manager however,
we need to look for ways our product can drive further revenue and customer satisfaction.
By looking at KPIs related to our customers journey from acquisition,
activation, to retention, we can learn
a lot about where to focus development time and effort.
The idea to break down data into acquisition, activation,
retention, revenue, and referral categories came from Dave Mcclure in 2007.
These metrics are called the Pirate Metrics because
their initials spelled out A-A-R-R-R or R,
as a pirate would say.
Over the past decade,
the use of pirate metrics has become widespread by
startups and growth hackers as they neatly follow a customer journey.
By calculating pirate metric KPIs around user acquisition, activation,
retention, revenue, and referral,
product managers can see where in the customer's journey something isn't working.
Focusing on these KPIs will help you
know how you can improve the product you're offering.
In this section, I'll cover examples and how to calculate KPIs for acquisition,
activation, retention, and introduce a few new important revenue metrics.
Referral typically involves measuring specific referral features.
We'll be covering ensuring data is collected for new features in a section after this.
The first step in a product is to get users.
Users need to know about our product in order to use or purchase it,
so the first step in pirate metrics is to calculate KPIs around user acquisition
because user acquisition KPIs show how many and how often users are finding your product.
KPIs around user acquisition focus on
measuring the number of users who learn about a product or feature.
Some examples would be,
the number of new visitors to a website or app in a day and the number of
new visitors that are coming from different sources
such as Facebook ads versus a referral program.
Watching and monitoring user acquisition KPIs
helps you know if your time should be focused on finding new users.
If your KPIs in this category aren't performing well,
as a product manager,
you'll know you need to do more work to help customers find you.
Boosting KPIs will often mean cross team collaboration with marketing to
ensure your service and product are being
advertised to the right type of customer, in the right way.
Acquisition is the first step in the pirate metrics framework
because it is the first step in the user journey to becoming a customer.
It doesn't matter how many customers would love
your features if you aren't bringing in the customers in the first place.
The second A in the pirate metrics stands for activation.
Activation is how quickly new visitors find
your product valuable and decide to become a customer.
Activation focuses on whether a potential customer goes from being aware of your product,
to taking the first step to becoming a customer.
Looking at activation data,
will show you whether visitors are actually deciding to try your product.
This is called activation conversion.
Some example activation KPIs might be the length of time users spend browsing
your site or product on first visit as this
indicates the user was interested enough to look around.
Even if the visitor isn't paying at,
a happy first visit shows they've gone from acquired to activated.
Another activation KPI might be the number of users who sign up for an account,
which shows the visitor is activated enough to
spend the time to create a profile to use the product.
Watching and monitoring user activation KPIs will help you know if
your time should be focused on the initial moments
where new visitors are deciding to become customers.
If your KPIs in this category aren't performing well,
as a product manager,
you'll know you need to do more work to help
customers find your product appealing enough to sign up,
or perhaps improve the on-boarding process
that transitions visitors into potential customers.
Boosting KPIs will often mean ensuring your landing page and
information make clear the value that a customer will get from using your product.
Activation is the second step in the pirate metrics framework
because it is the second step in the user journey to becoming a customer.
Your acquisition KPIs may look great
and many potential customers maybe finding your product,
but your products still won't be a success if you
aren't able to activate visitors into users.